[Doc][KubeRay] Kueue / RayJob - tutorial with toy example that everyone can try it locally (#43585)
ray-project/ray: doc/source/cluster/kubernetes/k8s-ecosystem/kueue.md

(kuberay-kueue)=
# Gang scheduling and priority scheduling for RayJob with Kueue

> This guide demonstrates the integration of KubeRay and Kueue about gang scheduling and priority scheduling for RayJob on your local Kind cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide demonstrates the integration of KubeRay and Kueue for gang and priority scheduling using RayJob on a local Kind cluster.
```

Refer to [Priority Scheduling with RayJob and Kueue](kuberay-kueue-priority-scheduling-example) and [Gang Scheduling with RayJob and Kueue](kuberay-kueue-gang-scheduling-example) for real-world use cases.

> ## What's Kueue?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Kueue
```

[Kueue](https://kueue.sigs.k8s.io/) is a Kubernetes-native job queueing system that manages quotas and how jobs consume them. Kueue decides when:

> * To make a job wait

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* To make a job wait.
```

> * To admit a job to start, meaning that Kubernetes creates pods.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* To admit a job to start, which triggers Kubernetes to create pods.
```

> * To preempt a job, meaning that Kubernetes deletes active pods.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* To preempt a job, which triggers Kubernetes to delete active pods.
```

Kueue has native support for some KubeRay APIs. Specifically, you can use Kueue to manage resources consumed by RayJob and RayCluster. 
See the [Kueue documentation](https://kueue.sigs.k8s.io/docs/overview/) to learn more.

## Step 0: Create a Kind cluster

```bash
kind create cluster
```

## Step 1: Install the KubeRay operator

Follow [Deploy a KubeRay operator](kuberay-operator-deploy) to install the latest stable KubeRay operator from the Helm repository.

## Step 2: Install Kueue

```bash
VERSION=v0.6.0
kubectl apply --server-side -f https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/releases/download/$VERSION/manifests.yaml
```

See [Kueue Installation](https://kueue.sigs.k8s.io/docs/installation/#install-a-released-version) for more details on installing Kueue.

> There are some limitations between Kueue and RayJob. See the [limitations of Kueue](https://kueue.sigs.k8s.io/docs/tasks/run_rayjobs/#c-limitations) for more details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some limitations exist between Kueue and RayJob. See the [limitations of Kueue](https://kueue.sigs.k8s.io/docs/tasks/run_rayjobs/#c-limitations) for more details.
```

kind: LocalQueue
metadata:
  namespace: "default"
  name: "user-queue"
spec:
  clusterQueue: "cluster-queue"
---
apiVersion: kueue.x-k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: WorkloadPriorityClass
metadata:
  name: prod-priority
value: 1000
description: "Priority class for prod jobs"
---
apiVersion: kueue.x-k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: WorkloadPriorityClass
metadata:
  name: dev-priority
value: 100
description: "Priority class for development jobs"
```

The YAML manifest configures:

* **ResourceFlavor**
  * The ResourceFlavor `default-flavor` is an empty ResourceFlavor because the compute resources in the Kubernetes cluster are homogeneous. In other words, users can request 1 CPU without considering whether it's an ARM chip or an x86 chip.
* **ClusterQueue**
    * The ClusterQueue `cluster-queue` only has 1 ResourceFlavor `default-flavor` with quotas for 3 CPUs and 6G memory.
    * The ClusterQueue `cluster-queue` has a preemption policy `withinClusterQueue: LowerPriority`. This policy allows the pending RayJob that doesn’t fit within the nominal quota for its ClusterQueue to preempt active RayJob custom resources in the ClusterQueue that have lower priority.
* **LocalQueue**

>   * The LocalQueue `user-queue` is a namespaced object in the `default` namespace which belongs to a ClusterQueue. A typical practice is to assign a namespace to a tenant, team or user, of an organization. Users submit jobs to a LocalQueue, instead of to a ClusterQueue directly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * The LocalQueue `user-queue` is a namespaced object in the `default` namespace which belongs to a ClusterQueue. A typical practice is to assign a namespace to a tenant, team, or user of an organization. Users submit jobs to a LocalQueue, instead of to a ClusterQueue directly.
```

* **WorkloadPriorityClass**

>   * The WorkloadPriorityClass `prod-priority` has a higher value than the WorkloadPriorityClass `dev-priority`. This means that RayJob custom resources with the `prod-priority` priority class take precedence over RayJob custom resources with the `dev-priority` priority class.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * The WorkloadPriorityClass `prod-priority` has a higher value than the WorkloadPriorityClass `dev-priority`. RayJob custom resources with the `prod-priority` priority class take precedence over RayJob custom resources with the `dev-priority` priority class.  
```

Create the Kueue resources:
```bash
kubectl apply -f kueue-resources.yaml
```

## Step 4: Gang scheduling with Kueue

Kueue always admits workloads in “gang” mode.

> In other words, Kueue admits workloads on an “all or nothing” basis, ensuring that no RayJob or RayCluster is partially provisioned.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kueue admits workloads on an “all or nothing” basis, ensuring that Kubernetes never partially provisions a RayJob or RayCluster.
```

Reviewer: Not sure if Kubernetes is the correct noun, so please correct as needed. Trying to remove passive voice.

> Gang scheduling strategy is commonly used to avoid waste of compute resources caused by the naive scheduling of workloads.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use gang scheduling strategy to avoid wasting compute resources caused by inefficient scheduling of workloads.
```

Download the RayJob YAML manifest from the KubeRay repository.

```bash
curl -LO https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ray-project/kuberay/master/ray-operator/config/samples/ray-job.kueue-toy-sample.yaml
```

> Before creating the RayJob, modify the RayJob metadata with:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before creating the RayJob, modify the RayJob metadata with the following:
```

```yaml
metadata:
  generateName: rayjob-sample-
  labels:
    kueue.x-k8s.io/queue-name: user-queue
    kueue.x-k8s.io/priority-class: dev-priority
```

Create two RayJob custom resources with the same priority `dev-priority`.

> There are some important points to note for the RayJob custom resources:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note these important points for RayJob custom resources:
```

* The RayJob custom resource includes 1 head Pod and 1 worker Pod, with each Pod requesting 1 CPU and 2G of memory.

> * The RayJob runs a simple Python script that demonstrates a loop running 600 iterations, printing the iteration number and sleeping for 1 second per iteration. Hence, the RayJob runs for about 600 seconds after the submitting Kubernetes Job starts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The RayJob runs a simple Python script that demonstrates a loop running 600 iterations, printing the iteration number and sleeping for 1 second per iteration. Hence, the RayJob runs for about 600 seconds after the submitted Kubernetes Job starts.
```

> * The RayJob enables automatic cleanup by setting `shutdownAfterJobFinishes` to true. Therefore, KubeRay deletes the RayCluster after the RayJob finishes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Set `shutdownAfterJobFinishes` to true for RayJob to enable automatic cleanup. This setting triggers KubeRay to deletes the RayCluster after the RayJob finishes.
```

  * Kueue doesn't handle the RayJob custom resource with the `shutdownAfterJobFinishes` set to false. See the [limitations of Kueue](https://kueue.sigs.k8s.io/docs/tasks/run_rayjobs/#c-limitations) for more details.

```yaml
kubectl create -f ray-job.kueue-toy-sample.yaml
kubectl create -f ray-job.kueue-toy-sample.yaml
```

Each RayJob custom resource requests 2 CPUs and 4G of memory in total.
However, the ClusterQueue only has 3 CPUs and 6G of memory in total.

> Therefore, the second RayJob custom resource remains pending, and no Pods from the pending RayJob are created, even though the remaining resources are sufficient for a Pod.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Therefore, the second RayJob custom resource remains pending, and Kubernetes doesn't create Pods from the pending RayJob, even though the remaining resources are sufficient for a Pod.
```

Reviewer: Again, not sure if the subject is Kubernetes, please correct as needed.

Author: Update "Kubernetes" to "KubeRay".

      Total:            2
      Borrowed:         0
      Name:             memory
      Total:            4Gi
  Pending Workloads:    1
  Reserving Workloads:  1
```

Kueue admits the pending RayJob custom resource when the first RayJob custom resource finishes.
Check the status of the RayJob custom resources and delete them after they finish:

```bash
$ kubectl get rayjobs.ray.io
NAME                  JOB STATUS   DEPLOYMENT STATUS   START TIME             END TIME               AGE
rayjob-sample-ckvq4   SUCCEEDED    Complete            xxxxx                  xxxxx                  xxx
rayjob-sample-p5msp   SUCCEEDED    Complete            xxxxx                  xxxxx                  xxx

$ kubectl delete rayjob rayjob-sample-ckvq4
$ kubectl delete rayjob rayjob-sample-p5msp
```

## Step 5: Priority scheduling with Kueue

This step creates a RayJob with a lower priority class `dev-priority` first and a RayJob with a higher priority class `prod-priority` later.
The RayJob with higher priority class `prod-priority` takes precedence over the RayJob with lower priority class `dev-priority`.
Kueue preempts the RayJob with a lower priority to admit the RayJob with a higher priority.

> If you followed the previous step, the RayJob YAML manifest `ray-job.kueue-toy-sample.yaml` should already set to the `dev-priority` priority class.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you followed the previous step, the RayJob YAML manifest `ray-job.kueue-toy-sample.yaml` should already be set to the `dev-priority` priority class.
```

Create a RayJob with the lower priority class `dev-priority`:

```bash
kubectl create -f ray-job.kueue-toy-sample.yaml
```

> Before creating the RayJob with the higher priority class `prod-priority`, modify the RayJob metadata with:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before creating the RayJob with the higher priority class `prod-priority`, modify the RayJob metadata with the following:
```

```yaml
metadata:
  generateName: rayjob-sample-
  labels:
    kueue.x-k8s.io/queue-name: user-queue
    kueue.x-k8s.io/priority-class: prod-priority
```

Create a RayJob with the higher priority class `prod-priority`:

```bash
kubectl create -f ray-job.kueue-toy-sample.yaml
```

> You can see that KubeRay operator deletes the Pods belong to the RayJob with the lower priority class `dev-priority` and creates the Pods belong to the RayJob with the higher priority class `prod-priority`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can see that KubeRay operator deletes the Pods belonging to the RayJob with the lower priority class `dev-priority` and creates the Pods belonging to the RayJob with the higher priority class `prod-priority`.
```
